Title: Feeling Overwhelmed, and Dealing With It
Date: 2014-11-05
Category: Programming
Tags: beginners
Slug: feeling-overwhelmed
Summary: Dealing with feeling overwhelmed when starting out.

The first time I learnt a programming language, I was astounded. I was
following exercises in a textbook, and I felt like I could do anything. I was
spending hours sorting out weird bugs and memorizing C++’s weird syntax.
However, as soon as I finished the book and began venturing out on the Web to
learn more on my own, I was *overwhelmed*.

There was so much to learn! Over the next few years, I learnt a new language
every few months, yet it still felt like I wasn’t learning fast enough and
"couldn't keep up with the competition." In every discussion I enter, every
hackathon I attend, people around me were talking about new
languages/frameworks/technologies/libraries. I felt like an impostor most of
the time, and I told myself I "wasn’t good enough."

And then I figured it out. I learnt how to deal with this feeling of
helplessness, build my skills, gain confidence, and carve out a career for
myself. It took me a long time, but I devised a good system for taking charge
of my learning and growth.

Here are two tricks you can start using today.

### Keep A Pile of "Things to Read"

Trust me, it sounds lame, but keeping a list helps to keep the burden off your
mind and help you feel less overwhelmed. As you encounter questions or new
terms, resist the urge to tackle them immediately. Instead, write them down,
and finish what you were working on. Review this list weekly and reorganize it
from time to time, then begin working items off this list once you get a
chance.

Anything (including Notepad, or vim) will work, but I personally use pocket and
OmniFocus.

It is especially gratifying to review your list at the end of each year and see
how far you have come. You may not be as good as the people you idolize, but
you will know that you are better than you were last year.

### Pick a Few, and Focus. Become an Expert.

Sometimes it feels like there are a lot of technologies, languages, and
frameworks out there. It’s impossible to learn them all. So what do we do?

We look to the data.

You can use trends from indeed.com and StackOverflow to get a feel of the most
popular or up-and-coming tools in the industry today and guess what will
continue to be useful in 1 to 4 years. Pick a few and focus on them until you
become an expert.

One more thing - believe it or not, you are an *engineer*, not just a
*programmer*. Every language is just a tool in your toolbox. Also, most skills
(such as logical thinking, debugging, and object-oriented programming) are
transferable.  Don’t worry about spending too much time on Ruby and not playing
with Python.  The knowledge you gain about interpreted languages are more
valuable than your familiarity with the syntax.
